The changes that were made in the 70s and 80s were very important.
Did we miss, as far as you can tell, in geology, did we miss any opportunities that we might have taken on in the last 20, 30 years?
Are there some things we failed to do?
Well,
I'm one of these people who thinks that a department has to have a focus.
And our department, Geology and Geophysics, does not.
And in fact, I'm the chairman of a committee that's called the Committee on Revitalization and Renewal.
And it's related to
A course that I took that was sponsored by the College of Education regarding that same thing in education.
Is that comedian now?
That committee is functioning?
Well, it hasn't met this year yet, but the last time we met was on trying to get a focus for a department.
One time, they wanted to focus.
The next time, the group had decided they didn't.
And I think, well, see,
Now, here's one of the things.
Geology at LSU is rated fairly high because they have a focus on the coast and coastal features.
If you were the decision maker, what focus would you try to have our department make?
I think continental margins.
because that would include almost everybody in the department could aim their things towards that.
Because this would include the people that are interested in plate tectonics and also the people that are interested in shorelines and what happens to shorelines under various conditions.
And the possibilities for teaching and research in that would be, there'd be opportunity for that.
Yeah.
But I don't know.
See, the conventional department has no focus.
I don't know that the University of Texas does, but they have one event.
They have the Bureau of Economic Geology associated with them.
And it ends up that, well, they've had some advantage over there.
They have been good at raising money.
Now, Bob Boyer, when he was department head of the Department of Geology over there, the reason he got to be dean was he raised money for the department.
From what were their primary sources of funding?
their graduates, if you're working for Exxon.
Okay.
And Exxon Matches, when
Gosh, I forget people's names.
I have a first-name basis with him, too, because he was the president of Exxon Corporation, a UT graduate that sent him off to Harvard Business College after he was working with Exxon.
And he became president when he was in charge of Exxon, if you were a UT employee.
All your donations to UT went through him.
If it were inadequate, he sent it back.
See?
Now, one of the biggest changes that came into my life was the darn SIMS computer.
Hold on.
We're talking about opportunities and emphasis and so forth.
In hindsight, were there any chances to get real funding that A&M might have gotten, but for somehow we stumbled and didn't get them?
Well, see, we've had a lot of people come in to look at chairs, and they have turned them down.
And some of them I got to know later when I became a counselor for the Geological Society of America.
One of the things is that people in our department have not been very oriented to help run some of these organizations.
In terms of engineering, geology, yes, we've been active there.
But in terms, in other words, I,
was the only counselor ever from this university on the governing council of the Geological Society of America.
And Gordon Eaton, after he left here, became a counselor.
But he didn't while he was here.
Now, was he a, is he a geologist?
Gordon Eaton, yeah.
Because, now he came here as dean?
Or did he come here as a faculty member?
No, he came here as dean.
Okay.
He'd been with the U.S.
Geological Survey and was fairly high up in the survey.
And then he left here to go to be, I think, the University of Iowa president.
Iowa State.
Iowa State, yeah.
And then to the Institute, Coastal Research Institute at Columbia.
And then from there, I think he went to head the U.S.
Theological Survey as a director.
He was in that period when the survey was going to be abolished by Congress.
And he managed to get things straightened out, although it cost a lot of geologists their jobs.
So there were a lot of people that didn't like him there in the survey.
Let's emphasize, let's go back to your, all of your accomplishments.
Now you've been here 40 years.
Since 54.
46, 47 years.
Yeah.
Of what are you most proud for all those years?
Well, I think my teacher training programs.
In other words, I can go to a teacher meeting and a teacher will run up and throw her arms around me and say,
That's great.
Did you read that article in Eagle?
There's some very complimentary things in there.
And essentially, my wife says, it shows the essence of your character and personality.
Now, this...
Hall of Fame, what is that honor called that you just received?
Well, I was inducted into the Texas Science Hall of Fame.
Now, this is the second year of it.
The first year, well, Kilby
One of our distinguished profs is in it, and he got a Nobel Prize as laureate this year.
Most of them were from University of Texas and Nobel Prize winners.
How many have been inducted each year, do you know?
Well, nine this year and about 12 last year.
So there's 21 people in it.
And, of course, last year...
Let's see.
DeBakey is in it and Cooley.
Splendid company.
And this year, the Texas Aggie that makes no doubt use the Texas Aggie, Red Duke.
Mm-hmm.
and somebody that's in there for helping change the educational standards, and therefore science education in our state, H. Ross Perot.
So those are the two top outstanding.
There are a couple other Nobel laureates in the group, and there are probably more physicians
medical people in that group, about five, six of them.
Are you the only geologist?
The only and first.
How did you learn, my curiosity, how did you learn that you were going to be selected?
or had been selected?
A letter that I got in the mail in October telling me that I had been selected.
Was it a total surprise?
Yes.
Oh, how nice.
How nice.
Well, I have a suspicion who nominated me and who pushed it.
It's a teacher that I had in my program by the name of Christina Comer, who's mentioned in that article.
How good.
And essentially,
She worked with the AAAS, Provence Program in Science Education, a 2061 project mainly designed to help middle school science teachers, and started working with it.
And eventually, she's now the director of science education for the Texas Education Agency.
And one of the problems that you have there is that you not only got to be interested in teachers, you got to be a politician also.
So I suspect that with her political influence deciding that I was worthy of this, there's only one other person before me, Dr. Scog from Texas Tech.
He's in the science education, in the college education there.
But he got it for his method of trying to get biology teachers to present evolution.
So, and that is where essentially he... Now, you still teach a class.
for this semester only, and I'm retiring completely.
Do you have any idea how many students you have had in all your classes?
How many thousands?
Have any idea?
Well, I know that in the summer programs, I've touched about 1,500 teachers.
1,500 teachers.
Now, I don't know how many teachers they've directly touched indirectly, but sure.
Because normally, we also had labs that were investigative type labs so that they can take the lab problems back and share with other teachers how to do certain things.
in the lab with certain exercises.
So, and you don't know how many thousands of students have been affected by it, so.
You gave, a while ago, you gave your thoughts about the department being focused.
Let's make believe now you're a consultant to the Dean of Geoscience
the provost, what advice would you give them about the college and about A&M academics in general?
Make believe you're the expert that they're seeking your advice.
What advice would you give them for A&M's future?
Well, one, we got prepared for what is happening to our public schools because they provide our students.
And regardless of what any governor or president says, we're going downhill.
Testing may be fine, but they are teaching to the test, and they're not teaching the material.
And there is a program that's being run at Rice by Dr. Linda Knight.
It's in conjunction with the Houston ISD, with Houston ISD.
may run the program, but they don't utilize what's coming out of it, and that is they take a teacher away from their environment for a whole year and put them through this program, which essentially tries to teach science by the investigative approach.
The minute you get back in your school, the principal will tell you he wants you to teach for that test.
And so you can't teach the way you teach there.
So I think we got to be prepared for that.
There'd been a lot of complaints by
people in our department that the students they get are not well prepared in high school, either math or science or this.
Well, I was trying to do my part, but the status when I started was better than it is now.
You think the students that you had 40 years ago were better prepared than the ones you have now?
Coming from high school?
Yes.
And they—but that's one of the facts of life.
You got to deal with it.
And this may be true countrywide, because I think all the school systems and all the states are having this problem.
See, the minute you get a situation where you have—
low unemployment, and there's a lot of employment around.
Since teachers are poorly paid, you don't get the people going into teaching.
And so about the only ones you get going into teaching are those that can't do anything else or those that are really devoted to teachers.
And there's a lot of them that are really devoted to it.
But they're getting tarred with the same brush as the others.
And when you get down to where 30% of your science teachers are not certified, 50% of your math teachers are not certified, you have a real problem.
And so they aren't passing the test, but the test is a fairly easy one.
So what I'm looking at is we got to prepare to meet that challenge and we may have to have more remedial courses and we ought to be prepared for it because otherwise we're not going to put out the product we need to put out.
And I'm not so sure the product isn't going downhill that we're putting out, but I can't be sure of that.
All right, also looking back over these 45, six years, what were two or three of the happiest moments for you in all of that time?
Proudest, happiest.
Well, certainly wasn't when my first wife died.
That was a low point.
And when she was in the nursing home, that was a very low point in my life.
Well, I would say this award was something that really, because it's something very special.
Oh, yes.
All right, do you remember some amusing moments, funny?
Well, let me put it this way.
When somebody comes back to me, like a bus driver, and say, I've taken Clay Sleward to a liquor store, and just as he got out under the sign over the liquor store, he got hit by lightning.
That was a
A moment that I... That really happened?
Yes.
This was one of those first black students?
No, Clay Seward.
Oh, oh, oh.
The bus driver had taken him to a liquor store to get... This is in Lano, Texas.
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
We happened to have a thunderstorm.
Yes, yes.
Okay, that's a good one.
Did any of the students ever attempt to play a joke on you in class?
No, but one place at one motel that I was in on a field trip, I opened up the door and I couldn't see out of it.
Most of these motel doors open inside.
They put a heavy craft paper over it and a sign outside.
I don't know what the sign said.
The only reason I went out is because there was a fire in the motel and the fire engine had drove up.
I wanted to see what was going on.
And the kids had papered over the door?
And then there was a group that, an academic year group, you see, because I had groups during the year, that we led a, had a field trip that went over part of Christmas vacation.
And so we had gone out, and we were staying at Alpine.
And unfortunately, I didn't know that one of the teachers in my group had a teacher friend in there, and the teacher friend
and the son that was in the police department at Alpine, and they happened to get together.
So the son in the police car came out to this motel.
I had told them about this story.
This happened under Travis Parker, where a field camp was out in Alpine.
They'd gone up and arranged the SR of rocks
to an A&M on the handle about it.
The only problem was that there was a big turmoil and the police were called out and some of them got arrested.
Rocks never got changed to, well, some of them got partially changed.
So on that particular day, I told them this story.
And so they said that they had been up on the hill looking at the Comet, Kuatek, but they came to my door, knocked on it.
The police guard was out there with the lights flashing and all of that.
And you thought they were going to be coming to get you?
No, I thought that, but they came down, and guess who they sent down?
We had a sister, a Catholic sister in that program.
They sent down her to tell this lie, that they'd been up looking for the comet Kuwatek on the hill and been picked up for the police because they thought they were going to rearrange the stones.
I thought it had happened.
All right, I've got a couple more questions.
Do you think of any important topics about your career in geology we haven't touched?
Is there anything we've left out that we should have covered?
I, in mongeology, I organized the south central section of the Geological Society of America.
It's now been 35 years or so.
Oh, that's good.
And I mentioned this at a meeting in Fayetteville last spring in April.
The next morning I had to stroke.
But the thing is, as I pointed out there, Bob Boyer was on the council at that time, the Geological Society of America, and they wanted to finish organizing the sections, and there was North Central and South Central needed to be formed.
And so there were a couple of us in there, and when Bob said it was going to take a lot of work to get this organized, well, I said I'd help out.
The other fellow that was there, sorry, I don't have the time.
So I was the only one.
And George Rapp organized the North Central.
So it took about, oh, six months.
We had to work up some bylaws and this type of thing, and then had to end up by selecting what states would be in.
And, like, Missouri decided to go to North Central instead of this.
So as a result, we ended up with what states were going to be in, and we had to put a petition to the council with a group of prospective officers.
I got nominated for two positions with a tie vote, and I said, well, I'd better be Secretary of Treasurer and get this thing going off the board.
And Steve Clavaugh became chairman of the section.
He was from the University of Texas.
We held our first meeting.
in Norman, Oklahoma.
And, of course, one of the people that helped us was Charlie Mankin, who was the state geologist for Oklahoma, was then, still is now.
And Charlie is a unique person.
He's a graduate of the University of Texas.
But he will always be the state geologist, although it's a political appointee.
The reason he will be
is that he knows all the important politicians in the state.
Has a private plane, visits all the localities.
So as a result, that's it.
So we got the first meeting off the ground.
The second meeting put us in the red.
It was run up by SMU in the Hilton Hotel in downtown Dallas.
And back then,
Coffee in a hotel, $1.25 a cup.
So the coffee ran us in the red.
All right, then my next to last question is, if someone gave you a million dollar check,
with only one requirement to it, that you pass that check on to Texas A&M, but you could decide what use A&M would make with that gift, what would you have them do with it?
In other words, if you could make a very generous gift to Texas A&M,
What would be your favorite?
Well, my wife and I made a gift of $25,000 with a matching $25,000 here recently for scholarships.
For whom?
Undergraduate.
In what area?
Earth science.
In what?
Earth science, okay.
So if they're not earth science, then geology.
But this, I would provide it in scholarship money for education.
Depends on what field I was interested in.
And how would you select the winners of scholarships for incoming freshmen?
Would it be sheer grades?
Grades, yes.
That's the way I'd go.
However, let's put it this way.
I worked on a library when I worked my way through college.
I worked 30 hours a week.
It costs you a letter grade.
And you don't have time to do much.
The only time is I met my first wife, so I started dating her.
You can guess what happened to the grades.
I was on probation.
So PhDs can be on probation too sometime in their life.
All right, my last question then is, what feelings do you hold for Texas A&M in your heart?
I'm not an Aggie, but I'll always be... I like A&M.
But you didn't finish the sentence.
I'll always be what?
Well, I can't be an Aggie, but I always like to be an Aggie.
Oh, okay.
All right.
No.
And I always go out and watch the band when we lose the football game.
The band always is a good band.
and there's no other marching band like it in the world.
Now, what causes you to have this great pride and love for A&M?
We're continuing that last question.
Why do you feel this way about A&M?
Well, I think it's mainly the students that I've encountered in all of this, because most of them have been very appreciative of
of becoming earth science teachers.
That's a good place to end.